title: ECMAScript 2019

# ECMAScript 2019 (ES10)

## Array.flat()

The `flat()` method creates a new array with all sub-array elements concatenated into it recursively up to the specified depth.

```js
const numbers = [1, 2, [3, 4, [5, 6]]];
// default depth is 1
numbers.flat();
> [1, 2, 3, 4, [5, 6]]
```

## Array.flatMap()

The `flatMap()` method first maps each element using a mapping function, then flattens the result into a new array. It is identical to a `map` followed by a `flat` of depth 1, but `flatMap` is often quite useful, as merging both into one method is slightly more efficient.

```js
const numbers = [1, 2, 3];
numbers.flatMap(x => [x * 2]);
> [2, 4, 6]
```

## Object.fromEntries()

The `Object.fromEntries()` method transforms a list of key-value pairs into an object.

```js
const records = [['name','Mathew'], ['age', 32]];
const obj = Object.fromEntries(records);
> { name: 'Mathew', age: 32}
```

## String.trimStart() and String.trimEnd()

The `trimStart()` method removes whitespace from the beginning of a string.

The `trimEnd()` method removes whitespace from the end of a string.

You can think why another new method already there are two method trimRight()and trimLeft() but it will be alias of above new methods

## Optional Catch Binding

Allow developers to use try/catch without creating an unused binding.
You are free to go ahead make use of catch block without a parameter.

```js
try {
   ...
} catch {
   ...
}
```

## Function.toString()

The `toString()` method returns a string representing the source code of the function.Earlier white spaces,new lines and comments will be removed when you do now they are retained with original source code

## Symbol.description

The read-only description property is a string returning the optional description of Symbol objects.

## Well Formed JSON.Stringify()

To prevent `JSON.stringify` from returning ill-formed Unicode strings.

## Array.Sort Stability

Elements with same sort value retain their order. It now uses always the stable TimSort algorithm.

## JSON ⊂ ECMAScript (JSON Superset)

The line separator (U+2028) and paragraph separator (U+2029) symbols are now allowed in string literals. Previously, these were treated as line terminators and resulted in SyntaxError exceptions.

{!docs/abbreviations.txt!}
