title: Blog 2020

# Developer Blog

A new year and some new ideas to go further in development.

## July 2020

**Multi Format REST Response**: Based on the DataStore the ALinex Server got a REST response system in which the format can be specified using accept header with a lot of possibilities from json, csv till excel files.

**Upgrade GUI**: Upgraded to the next Quasar and Quasar app version.

## June 2020

**Alinex Server Productive**: It is used at my work as backoffice system for some simple tasks in the moment. This shows that the extension of the base framework for individual use basically works and shows me the problems and optimizations. But the GUI is further under heavy development and may be usable till the end of this month. All in all this are early stages and I don't suggest to use it productively at the moment.

## May 2020

**Modular Server and GUI**: Making the REST Server modular, to be extended by specific business logic and extension modules.
This should allow to develop a core system and use these in specialized projects by adding to it or overwriting some parts.

**Mkdocs Material 5**: Transition for all modules to the next major version of mkdocs material.

## March 2020

**TS GUI Client**: I started to try to build a client using quasar with TypeScript. This is a first start of an universal frontend for [Alinex Server](https://alinex.github.io/node-server). But this was not running smoothly, I had often trouble because of incomplete definitions and also had to translate each piece of code while packing together. So I decided to go back and use vanilla JS.

**Rest Server Basics**: After the [server](https://alinex.github.io/node-server) is now running using TypeScript this month is a time for consolidation. The main part is to better understand the control flow and make it visual using logging.

**Static books**: Beside the HTML a PDF was available since some time but now I had to update it's creation and added also an ePub Version. As always the base HTML Site is the best.

## February 2020

**Going to the frontend direction**: This month I started to go my way further to the frontend. The earlier developed portal and portal client which was only a initial try should now be rebuild. My plan is to first complete the [server](https://alinex.github.io/node-server) with authentication and access right management this month. Then to build a multi device application on top in march...

**Validator simplification**: Within the code maintenance phase I decided to make the definition of deep structures in validator simpler. To make the definition of complex structures using multiple objects and arrays within each other a new `item`definition has been implemented which replaces the previous `keys` or `items` setting. [validator](https://alinex.github.io/node-validator)

## January 2020

**Code maintenance**: Good code has to be kept up to date. That means as my first thing this year will be to go over all actively used modules and update them to current standards. In this step I will try to add some smaller additions to give each also a little push forward.

{!docs/abbreviations.txt!}
